---
layout: distill
title: a distill-style blog post
description: From Scroll to Misbelief - Modeling the Unobservable Susceptibility to Misinformation on Social Media
date: 2021-05-22

authors:
  - name: Yanchen Liu
    url: https://liuyanchen1015.github.io/
    affiliations:
      name: Harvard, Cambridge, MA

bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Abstract
  - name: Introduction
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

## Abstract

Susceptibility to misinformation describes the extent to believe false claims, which is hidden in people's mental process and infeasible to observe. Existing susceptibility studies heavily rely on the crowdsourced self-reported belief level, making the downstream research homogeneous and unscalable. To relieve these limitations, we propose a computational model that infers users' susceptibility levels given their reposting behaviors. We utilize the supervision from the observable sharing behavior, incorporating a user's susceptibility level as a key input for the reposting prediction task. Utilizing the capability of large-scale susceptibility labeling, we could also perform a comprehensive analysis of psychological factors and susceptibility levels across professional and geographical communities. Hopfully, we could observe that susceptibility is influenced by complicated factors, demonstrating a degree of correlation with economic development around the world, and with political leanings in the U.S.

***

## Introduction

Inspired by the existing studies indicating that believing is an essential driver for disseminating, we propose to model susceptibility, which reflects users' beliefs, as a driver for the sharing behavior, while considering characteristics of the sharing content and user profile.  We propose a computational model to produce a user's unobservable susceptibility score based on their historical posts. We train the model with signals from the observable disseminating behavior. We construct approximate contrastive user-post pairs as the training data.

With such a design, we could utilize the rich data resources available for the sharing behavior on social media platforms to explore the best parameters for the computational model of the unobservable and data-hungry susceptibility variable. Additionally, we will demonstrate that the results obtained from this design align with human judgment and corroborate findings from previous literature using self-reported susceptibility scores. This indirect validation further underscores the effectiveness and reliability of our modeling.

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/suscep_model.pdf" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}

***
