---
layout: distill
title: From Scroll to Misbelief - Modeling the Unobservable Susceptibility to Misinformation on Social Media
description: 
date: 2023-11-08

authors:
  - name: Yanchen Liu
    url: https://liuyanchen1015.github.io/
    affiliations:
      name: Harvard, Cambridge, MA

bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Abstract
  - name: Introduction
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

## Abstract

Susceptibility to misinformation describes the extent to believe false claims, which is hidden in people's mental process and infeasible to observe. Existing susceptibility studies heavily rely on the crowdsourced self-reported belief level, making the downstream research homogeneous and unscalable. To relieve these limitations, we propose a computational model that infers users' susceptibility levels given their reposting behaviors. We utilize the supervision from the observable sharing behavior, incorporating a user's susceptibility level as a key input for the reposting prediction task. Utilizing the capability of large-scale susceptibility labeling, we could also perform a comprehensive analysis of psychological factors and susceptibility levels across professional and geographical communities. Hopefully, we could observe that susceptibility is influenced by complicated factors, demonstrating a degree of correlation with economic development around the world, and with political leanings in the U.S.

***

## Introduction

<div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
    <figure>
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/suscep_model.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
        <figcaption>Illustration of the Susceptibility Modeling. We formulate the model to predict whether a given user will retweet a specific misinformation tweet. We utilize a shallow neural network to predict the susceptibility score, and together with the dot product of the user and tweet embeddings to predict retweet behavior. Our model is trained using two loss functions: binary classification entropy and triplet loss.</figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

False claims spread on social media platforms, such as conspiracy theories, fake news, and unreliable health information, mislead people's judgment, promote societal polarization, and decrease protective behavior intentions<d-cite key="pennycook2021psychology"></d-cite><d-cite key="Thier2021HealthMisinformation"></d-cite>. The harm is especially significant in various contentious events including elections, religious persecution, and the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic<d-cite key="Ecker2022PsychologicalDriversMisinformation"></d-cite>. 
Many works have investigated the \textit{observable} behavior of information propagation such as where the information propagates<d-cite key="Taylor2023WhereDoesYour"></d-cite>, how people share it<d-cite key="Yang2021COVID19InfodemicTwitter"></d-cite>, and what people discuss about it<d-cite key="Gupta2023PolarisedSocialMedia"></d-cite>. However, it is still crucial but challenging to understand the \textit{unobservable} mental and cognitive processes  when individuals believe misinformation<d-cite key="Ecker2022PsychologicalDriversMisinformation"></d-cite>. Users' susceptibility (i.e., the likelihood of individuals believing misinformation) plays a pivotal role in this context. If a person is more susceptible to misinformation, they are not only more likely to share false claims but also more prone to being misled by them<d-cite key="Scherer2020WhoSusceptibleOnline"></d-cite>.

Existing works have investigated the psychological, demographic, and other factors that may contribute to the high susceptibility of a population<d-cite key="Brashier2020AgingEraFake"></d-cite><d-cite key="Pennycook2020WhoFallsFake"></d-cite>.
However, previous susceptibility studies heavily rely on self-reported belief towards false claims collected from questionnaire-based participant survey<d-cite key="Escola-Gascon2021CriticalThinkingPredicts"></d-cite><d-cite key="Rosenzweig2021HappinessSurpriseAre"></d-cite>, which presents several limitations. For instance, different participants might interpret the belief levels in different ways. Moreover, the data collection process is labor-heavy and thus limits the scale of downstream research on size, scope, and diversity of the target population<d-cite key="Nan2022WhyPeopleBelieve"></d-cite>.

The unobservance of people's beliefs makes it infeasible to model susceptibility directly. Luckily, existing psychological literature bridges unobservable beliefs and observable behaviors, showing that the sharing behavior is largely influenced by whether users believe the misinformation<d-cite key="Altay2022WhyFewPeople"></d-cite><d-cite key="Atske2019ManyAmericansSay"></d-cite>, the attributes of the sharing content<d-cite key="pennycook2021psychology"></d-cite><d-cite key="van2022misinformation"></d-cite>, and users' internal mental motives<d-cite key="Brady2020MADModelMoral"></d-cite><d-cite key="Islam2020MisinformationSharingSocial"></d-cite>. Motivated by these prior works, we formulate the relationship between believing and sharing described in social science literature into a machine learning task.

Concretely, we propose to infer people's susceptibility level given their re/posting behaviors. To parameterize the model, we wrap the susceptibility level as input for the prediction model of the observable reposting behavior. We perform multi-task learning to simultaneously learn to classify whether a user would share a post, and rank susceptibility scores among similar and dissimilar users when the same content is seen. Note that our model does not aim to predict any ground-truth susceptibility for individuals. Instead, we use users' reposting behaviors towards misinformation as a proxy for their susceptibility level for better interpretability. Our model design enables unobservable modeling with supervision signals for observable behavior, unlocks the scales of misinformation-related studies, and provides a novel perspective to reveal the users' belief patterns.

We conduct comprehensive evaluations to validate the proposed susceptibility measurement and find that the estimations from our model are highly aligned with human judgment. Building upon such large-scale susceptibility labeling, we further conduct a set analysis of how different social factors relate to susceptibility. We find that political leanings and psychological factors are associated with susceptibility in varying degrees. Moreover, our analysis based on these inferred susceptibility scores corroborates the findings of previous studies based on self-reported beliefs, e.g., stronger analytical thinking is an indicator of low susceptibility. The results of our analysis extend findings in existing literature in a significant way. For example, we demonstrate that susceptibility distribution in the U.S. exhibits a certain degree of correlation with political leanings.

To sum up, our contributions are:
1. We propose a computational model to infer people's susceptibility towards misinformation in the context of COVID-19, by modeling unobservable latent susceptibility through observable sharing activities.
2. Evaluation shows that our model effectively models unobservable belief, and the predictions highly correlate with human judgment.
3. We conduct a large-scale analysis to uncover the underlying factors contributing to susceptibility across a diverse user population from various professional fields and geographical regions, presenting important implications for related social science studies.

***
